How to retire an EC2 instance - OHSH-493 (#271)
OHS-Hosting-Infrastructure/infrastructure: docs/how-we-work/retiring-an-instance.md

# Saying Goodbye To an EC2 Instance

> One day you will die. Your presence on this plane shall cease. And eventually all memory of you, fond or otherwise, will go with it. But do not despair, the same is true of all things. Including EC2 instances, and here you'll learn how to at least navigate through that inevitable loss.

Reviewer: Do it for the lulz.

## **BEFORE MOVING FORWARD**

> You might be here because the EC2 instance in question is being retired because you suspect it's no longer in use. Or you're spinning up a new one to correct the mistakes of the old one. Or even the hardware it lives on is being shutdown. **No matter the reason, reach out to any teams that you suspect would possibly be using the instance, first.** This'll inform how you should, or shouldn't, move forward as well as give any affected parties the time to grieve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You are here because the EC2 instance in question is being retired. That might be because you suspect it's no longer in use, or you're spinning up a new one to correct the mistakes of the old one, or the hardware it lives on is being shutdown. **No matter the reason, reach out to any teams that you suspect would possibly be using the instance before doing anything else.** This'll inform how you should, or shouldn't, move forward, as well as give any affected parties the time to grieve.
```

## Steps to Retiring

- Breathe, you'll get through this.

> - Check the metrics of the instance on AWS console for any indications of life. It's best to compare to an instance that you're sure is still in use.

Reviewer: Can we get an explicit step in here about communicating with other teams/potential users?

Author: i'm just not sure where to put that step. the warning above the steps is my attempt to reference that need. but i'm not sure at which point specifically, other than before beginning, one would reach out/initiate working with a particular team.

Reviewer: Why not put it at the top of this list (after "breathe")?

> - Use the IP address of the retiring instance to search the logs of any other instances that may interact with this one. To ensure it's not in active use.

Reviewer: Where are you searching the logs? In Cloudfront?
```suggestion
- Use the IP address of the retiring instance to search the logs of any other instances that may interact with this one to ensure it's not in active use.
```

> - Track down and make a note of any resources that may be associated with and are **specific** to the retiring instance. i.e. security groups, volumes, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Make a note of any resources that may be associated with and are **not used** by the retiring instance. i.e. security groups, volumes, subnets, AMIs, snapshots, etc.
- If there are associated resources that are not specific to the retiring instance but have components that are, make note of those components (i.e. a security group used for a bunch of instances that has a rule specific to your retiring instance).
- Check that the instance is not a part of an autoscaling group. If it is and you delete it, it will just pop back up.
```

Reviewer: No, you're absolutely right. I am making the list slightly fuller (probably unnecessarily). While it's extremely unlikely a VPC would only have the EC2 instance, I think it may be more common for a subnet to be otherwise barren in a janky system. Since you're writing this for the general case, I included here. It's not necessary to include subnets as an example if you don't want to, but I do want the other change for readability. Make sense?

Author: that makes sense, just made a small change to make that item more readable.

> - Check to see if there are any snapshots being taken of the attached volume. If so be sure to archive the most recent snapshot. You'll cherish those memories later.

Reviewer: What should they do with the rest of the snapshots? Delete them? I think so but I'm not sure.

Author: i'm thinking so as well, but do you feel more than one snapshot should be archived?

Reviewer: Maybe like 1 per month for the last year or something? I have 0 context on what the logical thing to do would be here. @ssatagopan do you know what the retention expectation is from OHS around AMIs (if they have one)? I didn't see anything in any of the repos about this issue.

Reviewer 2: Our documentation around retention for backups is 1 year. I didn't see a requirement in the control that specifies it though, that 1 year is in our implementation statement:
"Backups are run Sunday through Saturday.  Each Amazon EC2 instance stores backups locally for 2 weeks and Amazon S3 holds backups for a year. Backup scheduling and status tracking is done through cron. The current drupal database backup scheme is to take a full backup every night and a binary log backup starting from the last full backup. "

Reviewer: OK so here's some info about how archiving works and what it does:
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/WindowsGuide/snapshot-archive.html
It sounds like we should be archiving the last year of snapshots and deleting anything earlier than that. They will continue to get deleted as time moves forward if cron is functioning as described. Perhaps we need an additional check to retain the latest backup after 1 year (I'm not sure if we do that). I don't see the benefit to retaining them as standard snapshots rather than as archived snapshots.

> - Find and take note of any relevant bits of terraform. If any exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Find and take note of any relevant bits of terraform if any exist.
```

- At this point run your findings by someone else with knowledge of the system.

> - Once you have the go ahead, go about retiring the EC2 instance and the previously gathered associated resources and terraform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once you have the go ahead, go about retiring the EC2 instance and the previously gathered associated resources either by running the terraform with the resources in question deleted or by manually removing them. You may have to delete things in a certain order due to dependencies.
```
